README.md, before:

# Summary

| Product          | Validator Services API                                                                                                                                                         |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Description      | Node.JS app that provides various API end points used by the IATI Validator API; also handles the validation for ad hoc data checks in user sessions on the Validator website. |
| Website          | [https://validator.iatistandard.org](https://validator.iatistandard.org)                                                                                                       |
| Related          | [IATI/validator-web](https://github.com/IATI/validator-web), [IATI/js-validator-api](https://github.com/IATI/js-validator-api)                                                 |
| Documentation    | [https://developer.iatistandard.org/](https://developer.iatistandard.org/)                                                                                                     |
| Technical Issues | https://github.com/IATI/validator-services/issues                                                                                                                              |
| Support          | https://iatistandard.org/en/guidance/get-support/                                                                                                                              |

# validator-services

## Endpoints

See OpenAPI specification `postman/schemas/index.yaml`. To view locally in Swagger UI, you can use the `42crunch.vscode-openapi` VSCode extension.

### Non REST Functions

#### blob-trigger-adhoc-file

- Blob Trigger

  - When file is added to blob storage container with name `ADHOC_CONTAINER`, this Function is triggered.
  - `/api/pvt/adhoc/upload` or `/api/pvt/adhoc/url` are the endpoints used to add files to blob storage.

- Actions

  - Sends file to Validator API
  - Saves validation report and metadata to `adhoc_validation` table

## Prerequisities

- nvm - [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) - Node version manager
- Node LTS
  - once you've installed nvm run `nvm use` which will look at `.nvmrc` for the node version, if it's not installed then it will prompt you to install it with `nvm install <version>`
- [Azure Functions Core Tools v4](https://github.com/Azure/azure-functions-core-tools)
- [Azure CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) version 2.4 or later.

## Getting Started

1. Follow instructions for nvm/node prerequisties above
1. Run `npm i`
1. Run `npm start` to run the function locally using the Azure Functions Core Tools

## Environment Variables

### Set Up

`cp .env.example .env`

### Description

#### .env

```bash
# DB connection
PGDATABASE=<dbname>
PGHOST=<host>
PGPASSWORD=
PGPORT=5432
PGSSL=true
PGUSER=<username>@<host>

# name of adhoc azure blob container
ADHOC_CONTAINER=

# validator API url and api key
VALIDATOR_API_URL=
VALIDATOR_FUNC_KEY=
```

#### local.settings.json

Required due to the storage binding used by this function

```json
{
    "IsEncrypted": false,
    "Values": {
        "FUNCTIONS_WORKER_RUNTIME": "node",
        "AzureWebJobsStorage": <storage_connection_string>,
        "STORAGECONNECTOR": <storage_connection_string>,
        "ADHOC_CONTAINER": <ADHOC_CONTAINER>
    }
}
```

### Adding New

Add in:

1. .env.example
1. .env
1. `/config/config.js`

Import

```
const config = require("./config");

let myEnvVariable = config.ENV_VAR
```

## Attached Debugging (VSCode)

- Set a breakpoint
- Press F5 to start the Azure Function and Attach the VSCode debugger
  - Configuration is contained in `.vscode/launch.json` and `.vscode/tasks.json`
- Trigger a request that will hit your break point
- Enojy!

## Linting and Code Formatting

[ESlint](https://eslint.org/) is used for code quality and [Prettier](https://prettier.io/) is used for formatting rules, see [Prettier vs. Linters](https://prettier.io/docs/en/comparison).

To run linting, use `npm run lint`, and to format the project, use `npm run format`.

### VS Code Integration

Autosave is enabled in `.vscode/settings.json`.

Recommended Plugins:

- [ESLint](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dbaeumer.vscode-eslint)
- [Prettier](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=esbenp.prettier-vscode)

## Creating a new route

`func new --name <routename> --template "HTTP trigger" --authlevel "function"`

## Integration Tests

### Running

- Install newman globally `npm i -g newman`
- Start function `npm start`
- Run Tests `npm test`

### Modifying/Adding

Integration tests are written in Postman v2.1 format and run with newman.

#### Process for editing tests

1. Check the tests in Postman are in sync with the Github repo:

   - Export the `validator-services` collection from the Postman client to `./integration-tests`
   - Run `npm run format`
   - Run `git diff integration-tests/validator-services-tests.postman_collection.json`

2. If this confirms the tests are in sync, then edit / update the tests in Postman.

   - Export again, format again, and commit.

## Release / Version Management

https://github.com/IATI/IATI-Internal-Wiki#detailed-workflow-steps

Commit message:

doc: instructions for maintenance mode tests

README.md, after:

# Summary

| Product          | Validator Services API                                                                                                                                                         |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Description      | Node.JS app that provides various API end points used by the IATI Validator API; also handles the validation for ad hoc data checks in user sessions on the Validator website. |
| Website          | [https://validator.iatistandard.org](https://validator.iatistandard.org)                                                                                                       |
| Related          | [IATI/validator-web](https://github.com/IATI/validator-web), [IATI/js-validator-api](https://github.com/IATI/js-validator-api)                                                 |
| Documentation    | [https://developer.iatistandard.org/](https://developer.iatistandard.org/)                                                                                                     |
| Technical Issues | https://github.com/IATI/validator-services/issues                                                                                                                              |
| Support          | https://iatistandard.org/en/guidance/get-support/                                                                                                                              |

# validator-services

## Endpoints

See OpenAPI specification `postman/schemas/index.yaml`. To view locally in Swagger UI, you can use the `42crunch.vscode-openapi` VSCode extension.

### Non REST Functions

#### blob-trigger-adhoc-file

- Blob Trigger

  - When file is added to blob storage container with name `ADHOC_CONTAINER`, this Function is triggered.
  - `/api/pvt/adhoc/upload` or `/api/pvt/adhoc/url` are the endpoints used to add files to blob storage.

- Actions

  - Sends file to Validator API
  - Saves validation report and metadata to `adhoc_validation` table

## Prerequisities

- nvm - [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) - Node version manager
- Node LTS
  - once you've installed nvm run `nvm use` which will look at `.nvmrc` for the node version, if it's not installed then it will prompt you to install it with `nvm install <version>`
- [Azure Functions Core Tools v4](https://github.com/Azure/azure-functions-core-tools)
- [Azure CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) version 2.4 or later.

## Getting Started

1. Follow instructions for nvm/node prerequisties above
1. Run `npm i`
1. Run `npm start` to run the function locally using the Azure Functions Core Tools

## Environment Variables

### Set Up

`cp .env.example .env`

### Description

#### .env

```bash
# DB connection
PGDATABASE=<dbname>
PGHOST=<host>
PGPASSWORD=
PGPORT=5432
PGSSL=true
PGUSER=<username>@<host>

# name of adhoc azure blob container
ADHOC_CONTAINER=

# validator API url and api key
VALIDATOR_API_URL=
VALIDATOR_FUNC_KEY=
```

#### local.settings.json

Required due to the storage binding used by this function

```json
{
    "IsEncrypted": false,
    "Values": {
        "FUNCTIONS_WORKER_RUNTIME": "node",
        "AzureWebJobsStorage": <storage_connection_string>,
        "STORAGECONNECTOR": <storage_connection_string>,
        "ADHOC_CONTAINER": <ADHOC_CONTAINER>
    }
}
```

### Adding New

Add in:

1. .env.example
1. .env
1. `/config/config.js`

Import

```
const config = require("./config");

let myEnvVariable = config.ENV_VAR
```

## Attached Debugging (VSCode)

- Set a breakpoint
- Press F5 to start the Azure Function and Attach the VSCode debugger
  - Configuration is contained in `.vscode/launch.json` and `.vscode/tasks.json`
- Trigger a request that will hit your break point
- Enojy!

## Linting and Code Formatting

[ESlint](https://eslint.org/) is used for code quality and [Prettier](https://prettier.io/) is used for formatting rules, see [Prettier vs. Linters](https://prettier.io/docs/en/comparison).

To run linting, use `npm run lint`, and to format the project, use `npm run format`.

### VS Code Integration

Autosave is enabled in `.vscode/settings.json`.

Recommended Plugins:

- [ESLint](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dbaeumer.vscode-eslint)
- [Prettier](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=esbenp.prettier-vscode)

## Creating a new route

`func new --name <routename> --template "HTTP trigger" --authlevel "function"`

## Integration Tests

### Running

- Install the dev dependencies, or ensure you have newman installed globally (`npm i newman -g`)
- Start function `npm start`
- Run Tests `npm test`

### Modifying/Adding

Integration tests are written in Postman v2.1 format and run with newman.

#### Process for editing tests

1. Check the tests in Postman are in sync with the Github repo:

   - Export the `validator-services` collection from the Postman client to `./integration-tests`
   - Run `npm run format`
   - Run `git diff integration-tests/validator-services-tests.postman_collection.json`

2. If this confirms the tests are in sync, then edit / update the tests in Postman.

3. When done, export from Postman again, format again, and commit.

### Limitations

#### Tests of the Maintenance Mode

The final folder of Postman tests is called `Maintenance Mode`. The app can be put in Maintenance Mode by setting an environment variable. But because the integration tests are run against an already started instance of the app (that is, Newman does not control the instance of the app to test against), it is not possible for Newman to turn this mode on part way through the test run.

As such, the Maintenance Mode tests have to be run separately from all the other tests, and they can only be run locally, not as part of the CI/CD pipeline.

To run the Maintenance Mode tests:

1. Edit `.env` to turn on Maintenance Mode.
2. Start the application as normal (with `npm start`)
3. Run just the Maintenance Mode tests with `npm run test-maintenance-mode`

#### Testing a local instance

If you want to test against a local instance of `validator-services` you need to have it pointed to a Unified Pipeline database. If you use a local database, you will need to ensure that you have run the Pipeline refresher with a reasonable number of datasets through to the validate stage, because the tests search for a dataset which has warnings, to check various things.

## Release / Version Management

https://github.com/IATI/IATI-Internal-Wiki#detailed-workflow-steps
